alright so what we're going to do now is so
we're going to have a look at wild cards
i'm going to bring up the text editor
that actually used in the last video
because that's going to make it easy for
me to make these changes and just
bring that up on the screen so you can see it
I've got a particular song that
I like to hear in the collection
but I can't remember exactly what it
was called nor who it's by the only
thing I do know is it's got the word
doctor in the title though so how would
I actually go about creating or retrieving
that information using sql code
well now that i've pasted this previous
query into my text editor i can just
come in here and just edit this where
clause and where it's got Doolittle i'm
going to delete that out and leaving the
double quotes in there instead i'm going
to type in percent the word doctor
without any additional spaces another
percent so this should list all the
songs that contain the word doctor in
their title and actually one other thing
i need to do i put where in its name
and
no longer will it be equal where it
needs to be here is like lets type that
in so.....
.....so now
if i copy that and paste it in i think
the problem there is the double quotes
haven't been interpreted correctly by text
edit these double quotes this is what
happens when you don't sort of use a
proper text editor you get these
funny result so I'm going to fix
that and see if that actually works a
bit better if it doesn't we're getting
the same problem let's actually try
changing that to a single quote because
the problem is the quote characters that are being typed here
are actually invalid so actually what I will do is copy I've got this copied in
another documents so going to copy
that i'll just try pasting that in there
again notice how the double quotes this
time are correct this is what sometimes
happens when you're using I mean not
using sort of a proper program editor
can get these weird little characters
that are appearing that aren't the true
double quotes and that's why we're
getting this error that couldn't be
recognized because that quote there is
actually different to this one here even
though
very much the same let's just run this
and we'll go back and talk about it now
that should work
alright so we actually got to work this
time and you can see that we've got a
result of all the songs that contain the
word doctor in them and just bring that
query back on the screen again theirs two
things to note about the command and 3
I guess if you count the fact that worked
firstly we use the keyword like instead
of the equal symbol we want to match
name that are like the text that we
typed in fact if I'd used equals
instead of like I'd only have got back
the wishbone ash doctor song
dr. the second thing is about that is
that the wild-card character in sql
is the percent character now you may be
used to using a ? to match single
characters or an astrix to match any
sequence but in sql you use the ? instead
of an astrix to match a sequence of zero
or more characters and actually there
was a third thing unlike equals which
performs a case-sensitive search like is
not case sensitive so you can use like
without a wild card if you want to
perform a search without worrying about
the case so that where clause matches
any rows that have the word doctor in
the song's title column now bands
sometimes change their names think of
prints or the sensational alex harvey
band and this collection contains at
least one album by jefferson
airplane which later became jefferson
starship which looks like another good
use for a wildcard search let's go ahead
and change the like there and where we
got song title lets come back and change
that to artists . name and this time
we'll change that to like instead of the word
doctor we're gonna go with Jefferson this
time I'm going to leave the percentage
of the start so it's Jefferson without
the double quotes and i think im gonna
get problems with those single quotes
again so i'm going to copy this
off-screen again and I'm going to paste
in here you can see those double quotes
are now fixed and incidentally if you're
doing this with android studio as if
you're copying to and from Android
studio or
proper text editor then you wouldn't be
getting these weird little things i'm
getting here now let's paste that in
just to see that it works okay and we'll
just go back to look at the query again
you can see both on the screen now and
the reason that i left off the initial
percent the one of the start of the word
Jefferson is because I knew the band's
name started with Jefferson but the
query would still work if I'd left it in
now sql also allows an underscore to
match a single character if you need to
do that
alright so that's all working fine and
once you know to use like and the
percent character they shouldn't really
be anything surprising about wildcard
searches even using the ability to copy
and paste between the terminal window or
command prompt in a text editor though
it's still a bit tedious having to
re-enter all those commands when all we
actually changed was the where clause
now the major client server databases
have have one as known as stored procedures
which are a way to store sql queries
amongst other things and execute them
when you want often with parameters for
things like the text to search for they
operate a little bit like functions or
methods that are stored in the database
and can be reused when you want
unfortunately though its sql lite
doesn't have stored procedures and is
actually good reason for this and it's a
result of the fact that sql lite is
intended to be embedded in programs so
normal
normal client sql databases
have the database server running on a
remote machine that you connect to in
order to access to data a stored procedure
runs on the server so it's far more
efficient than trying to work with a
large data set on a remote machine but
as sql lite is not client-server
and everything is running on the same
machine anyway the advantages of using
stored procedures really don't apply in
addition you don't generally use sql
lite interactively like we're doing
here
we're doing this because we develop
applications and need to try things out
and get queries working etc but
ordinary users wouldn't normally
interact with a sql database in this way it would all be done via the
application itself the bottom line here
is the absence of stored procedures
isn't really a drawback when you
consider the way in which sql lite
is intended to be used but one thing
that it does have
in common with the client server
database systems is views so a good way
to think about view is as a virtual
table
it doesn't really exist as a table but
can be used as though it is one now you
can't modify data using a view at
least not in sql lite so you can't
update delete or insert but you can
query them just as if they were a table
and this will probably make more sense
once we've seen a view in action
i'm going to create one based on the
query we've been using a few times and
then talk some more about it so we come
back here we start typing in sql lite
and what I might do is quit out of
it clear the screen and start up again
so we are coming in with a clean
slate so we created a view using the sql
command using the sql create view
statement so....
....
...
....and that's now
created the view and we can see that
this is now part of the database by
using the . schema command so...and you can see the entry on the
bottom shows us the that we've got the
view called artist_list and the
commands to actually produce it at that
point you could use that code if you
wanted to you could put that in your
code your application or whatever you
wanted to do sort of the copy and paste
to use the view though its really quite
simple you treat it just like you would
treat any other table so we can do a
select star....
....and you can actually
filter it also just like a table so
select....
....so we now effectively have
another table called artist_list that contains the data from three
related tables and I think that's
incredibly cool and views are very very
useful things to have you can also
create views on a single table and
perhaps to restrict the columns that are
returned or the show the record in a
specified order without having to use
the order by Clause every time now this
can be a good way to include security in
your application the marketing
department of a bank for example
may need to know the contact details of
customers so it can send out to mail shops or
emails but they shouldn't have access to
customers security questions or account
details so a view could be used to
provide them with the details they need
while hiding the details that they
shouldn't be made commonly available
or that shouldn't be made commonly
available now you also probably wouldn't
want ordinary users seeing the link
columns in our tables they're
interesting to us as developers but the
numbers at the end of this
statement....
.....so the numbers there would just be
confusing to other people and actually
the primary key field is also
confusing so we can actually create
create a view that just returns the
album names so going to something like.....
....
.....and
obviously at that point we are only getting the
names now ideally I would have done a
case-insensitive ordering there because
we once again got whipped jamboree in
heavens to Betsy out of order as far as
most humans would be concerned right
down the bottom there now because a view
doesn't actually exist in a way that a
table does we can actually delete the
view and recreate it with the order by
Clause corrected so the command to
actually delete the view would be drop
view type in the view name so album_list in this case and
incidentally you can also delete tables
using the command drop table followed by
a table name but while deleting a view
doesn't affect the data in the database
deleting a table obviously will and
yes I've also done that by mistake as
well but now that I've actually deleted
the view i can actually recreate it
going to paste the command in there to
recreate it and noting that I've got
collate no case on the end there and I
can do a select....
....and this time we've got
things sorted in the right order you can see
here the lower case whipped jamboree is now
where most humans would expected to
be sorted and that's just about
everything we need to know to be able to
put a database in our program before i
finish so there's just one more thing
I'd like I need to say about views now
you may have noticed that when i
selected the jefferson starship albums
from the view earlier i didn't have to
specify which name column I was searching
on so I type....
....
...so that was the
command I used if you haven't turned
headers on or you have to stop and start
sql lite like i have used the command
to put them on again....
....so let's type that command
again I'm just going to come up here and
drag it down and now I've done that you can
see here its got name and a comma name
column 1 and title now because
they were too named field in the Select
statement sql lite has renamed one of them
so that the column name is a unique and
. schema will remind us of the command
we used to create the views so if we type
schema again because of the clash
sql lite automatically renamed the name
columns from the album's table to be
name column 1 now not all database
systems do this and it's a good idea to
explicitly named the columns when you
create the view if it's going to be
named clash or potential name clash so
put that right what we need to do is
drop the view and recreate it this time
giving the two name column a unique
name so I'm going to just copy some
code here that both drops the view and
recreate it again just to save a bit of
time so there's the code you can see
that were initially dropping the view
and we're creating at this time
press ENTER that's been created and now when I do that command again
the Select command and incidentally I've
used as after the artist and album
column names to provide a new name that
the columns will be known as in the view
in case you're wondering what that was
and if I paste this in and have a look at that
again we've now got artist and album track
and title we no longer got name and name column 1
alright so that's the end of this
introduction to databases in the sql
language in the next video I'm going to
start going through show you how we can
use sql lite in our programs but
before we do that theirs a little bit
of housekeeping that we're going to do
in the next video I'm going to set you a
challenge and then after that challenge
we're going to go through and start
putting this to use on an android
application so see you in the next video